```{=mediawiki}
{{Short description|Unitarian editions published since 1724}}
```
```{=mediawiki}
{{good article}}
```
```{=mediawiki}
{{italic title}}
```
```{=mediawiki}
{{Use American English|date=February 2023}}
```
![The [King\'s Chapel](King's_Chapel "wikilink") *Book of Common
Prayer*, in its ninth edition first published in 1986, is still used by
the [Boston](Boston "wikilink") congregation.\|alt=A copy of the ninth
edition King\'s Chapel Book of Common
Prayer](images/1986_King's_Chapel_BCP.jpg "The King's Chapel Book of Common Prayer, in its ninth edition first published in 1986, is still used by the Boston congregation.|alt=A copy of the ninth edition King's Chapel Book of Common Prayer")
Since the 18th century, there have been several editions of the *[Book
of Common Prayer](Book_of_Common_Prayer "wikilink")* produced and
revised for use by [Unitarians](Unitarianism "wikilink"). Several
versions descend from an unpublished [manuscript](manuscript "wikilink")
of alterations to the [Church of
England](Church_of_England "wikilink")\'s [1662 *Book of Common
Prayer*](Book_of_Common_Prayer_(1662) "wikilink") originally produced by
English philosopher and clergyman [Samuel
Clarke](Samuel_Clarke "wikilink") in 1724, with descendant [liturgical
books](liturgical_book "wikilink") remaining in use today.

Clarke, a [Semi-Arian](Semi-Arianism "wikilink") and
[Subordinationist](Subordinationism "wikilink"), viewed the doctrine of
the [Trinity](Trinity "wikilink") as theologically unsound and saw the
1662 prayer book\'s inclusion of elements like the [Athanasian
Creed](Athanasian_Creed "wikilink") as perpetuating these errors.
Clarke\'s manuscript alterations emphasized the excision of Trinitarian
references in favor of prayers directed toward [God the
Father](God_the_Father "wikilink"). [Theophilus
Lindsey](Theophilus_Lindsey "wikilink") would build upon Clarke\'s work
after receiving a copy of the changes, publishing his own series of
Unitarian prayer books from 1774 onward. Lindsey\'s [Essex Street
Chapel](Essex_Street_Chapel "wikilink") in London, the first Unitarian
church in England, utilized these prayer books for worship. When an
Essex Street Chapel congregant introduced [James
Freeman](James_Freeman_(clergyman) "wikilink") of [King\'s
Chapel](King's_Chapel "wikilink") in [Boston](Boston "wikilink") to
Lindsey\'s prayer book, Freeman further edited its
[liturgies](Christian_liturgy "wikilink") and convinced his congregation
to adopt his revision in 1785.

These Unitarian forms were among a trend of
[Nonconformist](Nonconformist_(Protestantism) "wikilink") efforts to
revise the 1662 prayer book through the 18th and 19th centuries; the
Anglican prayer book remained the primary basis for English Unitarian
worship literature until 1861. The Unitarian revisions influenced other
prayer book revision efforts, including [John
Wesley](John_Wesley "wikilink")\'s *[The Sunday Service of the
Methodists](The_Sunday_Service_of_the_Methodists "wikilink")* and the
American [Episcopal
Church](Episcopal_Church_(United_States) "wikilink")\'s first attempted
prayer book revision. The King\'s Chapel prayer book, currently in its
ninth edition as first published in 1986, remains that congregation\'s
standard liturgical text.

## History

```{=mediawiki}
{{multiple image
 | total_width       = 320
 | image1            = Rev Samuel Clarke.jpg
 | image2            = Theophilus Lindsey.jpg
 | footer            = [[Samuel Clarke]]'s ''(left)'' personal prayer book was used as the basis for [[Theophilus Lindsey]]'s ''(right)'' 1774 prayer book.
}}
```
Layman Edward Stephens published a book in 1696 that spurred a movement
of suggested revisions to the [Church of
England](Church_of_England "wikilink")\'s [legally
mandated](Act_of_Uniformity_1662 "wikilink") liturgy, the [1662 *Book of
Common Prayer*](Book_of_Common_Prayer_(1662) "wikilink"). The
movement\'s proposals generally sought to \"shorten and unify the
service\". Inspired by Stephens, [William
Whiston](William_Whiston "wikilink") forwarded his own more unorthodox
revisions in 1713, part of a trend that saw such proposals increasingly
alter the Anglican prayer book in accordance with
[Arian](Arianism "wikilink") and [Unitarians](Unitarianism "wikilink")
theologies. However, these early revisions ultimately had little
influence on later
[Nonconformist](Nonconformist_(Protestantism) "wikilink")
liturgies.[^1]`{{refn|group=note|Stephen's 1696 text was entitled ''Liturgies of the Ancients represented, as near as well be, in English forms, with a Preface concerning the Restitution of the most Solemn Part of the Christian Worship in the Holy Eucharist, to its Integrity, and just Frequency of Celebration''. Whiston, who was more liturgically sophisticated than Stephens, published ''The Liturgy of the Church of England, reduced nearer to the Primitive Standard'' in 1713.<ref>{{harvnb|Maxwell|1949|p=31}}</ref>}}`{=mediawiki}
However, a set of Unitarian prayer book revisions by [Samuel
Clarke](Samuel_Clarke "wikilink") which were edited and published after
his death by [Theophilus Lindsey](Theophilus_Lindsey "wikilink") would
heavily influence over a third of all [English
Dissenters](English_Dissenters "wikilink") liturgies for 80 years.[^2]

Clarke, the Church of England rector of [St James\'s Church,
Piccadilly](St_James's_Church,_Piccadilly "wikilink"), privately created
an altered version of the 1662 prayer book in 1724. He was a
[Semi-Arian](Semi-Arianism "wikilink") and, like early Unitarians in
[Transylvania](Transylvania "wikilink") and what was then the
[Polish--Lithuanian
Commonwealth](Polish–Lithuanian_Commonwealth "wikilink"), a
[subordinationist](Subordinationism "wikilink") who held that [God the
Father](God_the_Father "wikilink") was supreme and, unlike [God the
Son](God_the_Son "wikilink"), alone worthy of worship.[^3] Clarke had
previously published a study of 1,250 [Bible](Bible "wikilink") verses,
*The Scriptural Doctrine of the Trinity*, in
1712.`{{refn|group=note|Despite Scovel giving the date of original publication for ''The Scriptural Doctrine of the Trinity'' as 1719,<ref>{{harvnb|Scovel|2006|p=214}}</ref> it is generally given as 1712.<ref>{{harvnb|''Encyclopædia Britannica''|1911}}; {{harvnb|Vailati|Yenter|2021}}; {{harvnb|Marshall|2004|p=112}}</ref> Clarke was regularly involved in philosophical and doctrinal discussion, particularly [[Newtonianism]] through his association with [[Isaac Newton]]. Despite public retracting his views and ceasing writing on the Trinity under threat of [[censure]] by [[Convocations of Canterbury and York|Convocation]], Clarke appears to have privately continued rejecting Trinitarianism.<ref>{{harvnb| Wigelsworth|2003}}; {{harvnb|Westerfield Tucker|1996|p=244}}</ref>}}`{=mediawiki}
This book contained Clarke\'s theology and prescribed a new rule for
prayer based on the notion [Jesus Christ](Jesus_Christ "wikilink")
derives his powers as [savior](Salvation_in_Christianity "wikilink")
from the Father.[^4] In Clarke\'s view, the theology of the
[Trinity](Trinity "wikilink") had developed as a result of poor
[metaphysics](metaphysics "wikilink") and the inclusion of the
[Athanasian Creed](Athanasian_Creed "wikilink") in the 1662 prayer book
perpetuated this inaccurate theology.[^5] He had seen and liked
Whiston\'s *Liturgy of the Church of England reduced* before its 1713
publication. However, Clarke deviated from Whiston\'s embrace of the
*[Apostolic Constitutions](Apostolic_Constitutions "wikilink")* and
favoured changes that did not substantially alter the prayer book\'s
patterns while still expressing an Arian theology.[^6]

In his 1724 [manuscript](manuscript "wikilink") of alterations to the
1662 prayer book, Clarke rewrote prayers to redirect them exclusively
towards God the Father.[^7] Clarke was a friend of [Caroline of
Ansbach](Caroline_of_Ansbach "wikilink"), who later became queen consort
of King [George II](George_II_of_Great_Britain "wikilink"). After
Caroline became queen in 1727, Clarke intended to request she push his
nomination as a [bishop](bishop "wikilink"), a position that would allow
him to formally revise the prayer book. Had he not declined to sign the
[Thirty-nine Articles](Thirty-nine_Articles "wikilink") and encountered
protests from [William Wake](William_Wake "wikilink"), the incumbent
[Archbishop of Canterbury](Archbishop_of_Canterbury "wikilink"), over
this [heterodoxy](heterodoxy "wikilink"), historian A. Elliot Peaston
believed Clarke might have become the Archbishop of Canterbury.[^8]
Unable to secure official support for his views, Clarke\'s altered
prayer book went unpublished. However, copies were made and the original
manuscript alterations were given to the [British
Library](British_Library "wikilink") following his
death.[^9]`{{refn|group=note|Clarke died in 1729. His prayer book was donated to the British Library by his son, also named Samuel Clarke, in 1768.<ref>{{harvnb|''Dictionary of National Biography''|1887}}</ref> John Jones, a disciple of Clarke, anonymously published ''[[Free and Candid Disquisitions]]'' in 1749. Here, Jones called on Convocation to approve a revised prayer book Dissenters could support but encouraged unofficial revisions should official channels fail.<ref>{{harvnb|Jasper|1989|p=15}}</ref>}}`{=mediawiki}

[thumb\|upright=.75\|An 1863 American edition of *Common Prayer for
Christian Worship*, which initiated a departure from the 1662 prayer
book\'s pattern in subsequent English Unitarian prayer
books](File:Common_Prayer_for_Christian_Worship.jpg "wikilink")
Clarke\'s alterations would eventually inspire several revised prayers
books for [Presbyterian](Presbyterianism "wikilink")-influenced
congregations and become the basis for what historian [G. J.
Cuming](Geoffrey_Cuming "wikilink") deemed the most influential
unofficial revision to the 1662 prayer book.[^10] Theophilus Lindsey,
then a Presbyterian-minded Church of England vicar at the [Church of St
Anne, Catterick](Church_of_St_Anne,_Catterick "wikilink"), acquired a
copy of Clarke\'s altered prayer book made by his brother-in-law and
fellow clergyman [John Disney](John_Disney_(Unitarian) "wikilink").[^11]
Therein, Lindsey found Clarke\'s many revisions, including references to
the Trinity \"slashed out with violent strokes\". Lindsey was so
impressed with Clarke\'s work that he intended to introduce the changes
to his congregation at Catterick, but ultimately decided against such
action as he believed they would in violation of his
[vows](vow "wikilink") to the Church of England.[^12] However, following
his resignation from the church and with influence by [John
Jones](John_Jones_(controversialist) "wikilink")\'s 1749 *[Free and
Candid Disquisitions](Free_and_Candid_Disquisitions "wikilink")*,
Lindsey added further Unitarian alterations to Clarke\'s work and
published them in 1774 as *The Book of Common Prayer reformed according
to the plan of the late Dr Samuel Clarke*.[^13] An enlarged edition was
published in 1775. While Lindsey used Clarke\'s name, liturgist [Ronald
Jasper](Ronald_Jasper "wikilink") later argued that little was borrowed
from the 1724 alterations in producing the 1774 prayer book and that
Lindsey\'s liturgy was more radical, with influence by [William
Whiston](William_Whiston "wikilink").[^14]

Lindsey\'s prayer book was utilized by the Dissenter congregation he
founded at [Essex Street Chapel](Essex_Street_Chapel "wikilink")---the
first formally Unitarian church in England---from its first service on
17 April 1774 onward.[^15] Lindsey was part of a network of like-minded
churchmen, including [Joseph Priestley](Joseph_Priestley "wikilink"),
that had influenced Lindsey\'s aversion to the unmodified 1662 prayer
book before his resignation from the Church of England.[^16] Priestley
would write in support of Unitarian liturgical worship in his 1783
*Forms of Prayer*.[^17] While Lindsey seems to have approved of
Priestley\'s efforts to produce a paraphrased Bible, Lindsey retained
the [King James Version](King_James_Version "wikilink") and 1662 prayer
book\'s [psalter](psalter "wikilink") for his revised prayer book on the
premise that he was preserving the 1662 prayer book\'s scriptural
foundations while replacing its theology.[^18] Lindsey\'s prayer book,
which was repeatedly revised, proved popular with Presbyterians and
helped cement the address of all prayers to God the Father as \"one of
the most tenacious characteristics of Unitarian worship\".[^19]

English Unitarian attempts to revise the Anglican prayer book continued
into the 19th century. Lindsey\'s editions in particular remained a
dominant influence in English Unitarian service books.[^20] However,
some Unitarian liturgies`{{snd}}`{=mediawiki} including [John Prior
Estlin](John_Prior_Estlin "wikilink")\'s 1814 *General
Prayer-Book*`{{snd}}`{=mediawiki} were derived from the 1662 prayer book
independent of Lindsey\'s work.[^21] Despite their departure from
Trinitarian orthodoxy, English Unitarian revisions often featured only
conservative changes in hopes of limiting division between Unitarians
and the Church of England.[^22] In 1861, [Thomas
Sadler](Thomas_Sadler_(Unitarian) "wikilink") and [James
Martineau](James_Martineau "wikilink") published *Common Prayer for
Christian Worship*, initiating a departure from utilizing the Anglican
prayer book as the basis of English Unitarian worship. However, some
Anglican influences survived within Sadler and Martineau\'s text and
five of the 40 English Unitarian liturgical books published from 1861
until the middle of the next century were derived from the Anglican
prayer
book.[^23]`{{refn|group=note|Sadler had previously ministered at Little Portland Street Chapel, a Unitarian congregation that utilized a liturgy derived from Lindsey's recension.<ref>{{harvnb|Ledger-Lomas|2013|p=222}}</ref>}}`{=mediawiki}

### Freeman and the King\'s Chapel liturgy

```{=mediawiki}
{{multiple image
 | total_width       = 320
 | image1            = Reverend William Hazlitt.jpg
 | image2            = Portrait_of_Reverend_James_Freeman_-_Gilbert_Stuart.jpg
 | footer            = [[William Hazlitt (Unitarian minister)|William Hazlitt]] ''(left)'' was a member of the [[Essex Street Chapel]] congregation and, while living in [[Boston]] in 1784, gave a copy Lindsey's revised prayer book to [[James Freeman (clergyman)|James Freeman]] ''(right)''.
}}
```
In 1784, Essex Street Chapel congregant [William
Hazlitt](William_Hazlitt_(Unitarian_minister) "wikilink") provided a
copy of Lindsey\'s prayer book to his friend [James
Freeman](James_Freeman_(clergyman) "wikilink") of [King\'s
Chapel](King's_Chapel "wikilink") in [Boston](Boston "wikilink"),
spurring a Unitarian revision of the prayer book that remains in use
there today.[^24] Founded in 1686, King\'s Chapel was the oldest
Anglican church in
Boston.[^25]`{{refn|group=note|King's Chapel was also known as First Episcopal Church.<ref>{{harvnb|Peaston|1940|p=84}}</ref>}}`{=mediawiki}
As the [American Revolutionary
War](American_Revolutionary_War "wikilink") escalated, King\'s Chapel\'s
[Loyalist](Loyalist_(American_Revolution) "wikilink") Anglican minister
and much of its congregation fled with the [British
Army](British_Army "wikilink") when it [evacuated
Boston](Siege_of_Boston#Evacuation "wikilink") in 1776. The Anglicans
who remained permitted members of the [Old South
Church](Old_South_Church "wikilink") congregation to use King\'s Chapel,
with the two groups celebrating separately at alternating times in the
day.[^26] Under this scheme, Freeman---a
[Harvard](Harvard_University "wikilink") graduate and
[Congregationalist](Congregationalism_in_the_United_States "wikilink")---was
invited to serve as a [lay reader](Licensed_lay_minister "wikilink") at
King\'s Chapel in 1782.[^27] The congregation\'s proprietors chose
Freeman as pastor on 21 April 1783.[^28]

Freeman was initially content with using the 1662 prayer book as
modified at [Trinity
Church](Trinity_Church,_Boston_(Summer_Street) "wikilink").[^29]`{{refn|group=note|Trinity Church was the only Anglican congregation in Boston to remain open during the whole American Revolutionary War. To "preserve public tranquility", the liturgy was modified to excise references to the British king.<ref>{{harvnb|Peabody|1980}}</ref>}}`{=mediawiki}
In the aftermath of the [American
Revolution](American_Revolution "wikilink"), there was broad support for
both a new American Anglican church and a local revision to the 1662
prayer book.[^30] Simultaneously, there was a rise of Unitarian
sentiment across [New England](New_England "wikilink") congregations,
including at King\'s Chapel.[^31] Already, King\'s Chapel had ceased
praying the 1662 prayer book\'s prescribed prayer for the king and
[royal family](British_royal_family "wikilink"), instead substituting
prayers for the
[president](President_of_the_Continental_Congress "wikilink") and
[Congress](Congress_of_the_Confederation "wikilink"). Additionally,
Freeman\'s position enabled him to say the Athanasian Creed at his
discretion.[^32] Hazlitt, who had arrived in Boston from England in
search of a preaching position, informed Freeman of Lindsey\'s prayer
book and convinced Freeman and \"several respectable ministers\" to
abandon the ubiquitous Trinitarian
[doxology](doxology "wikilink").[^33]`{{refn|group=note|Freeman's theological shift was unlike many of his New England Congregationalist contemporaries who approached Unitarianism through Arianism. Freeman, in regular correspondence with English Unitarians, would first adopt [[Socinianism]] before fully embracing Unitarian theology.<ref>{{harvnb|Dartmouth}}</ref>}}`{=mediawiki}

At age 24, Freeman pressed King\'s Chapel to adopt a revised prayer
book.[^34] On 20 February 1785, the proprietors voted to create a
committee composed of seven men to report on Freeman\'s
alterations.[^35] Drawing upon Clarke and Lindsey\'s work, Freeman
worked with Hazlitt on a prayer book which was then put to a vote by the
proprietor\'s of King\'s Chapel.[^36] Freeman wrote to his father before
the vote, saying that he was optimistic that he had the necessary
support but would resign from his position as pastor should the prayer
book vote fail.[^37] On 19 June, Freeman\'s prayer book was adopted by a
20--7
majority.[^38]`{{refn|group=note|Greenwood notes that three of the opposing votes came from proprietors who had worshipped exclusively at Trinity Church since 1776.<ref>{{harvnb|Greenwood|1833|p=138}}</ref>}}`{=mediawiki}
\"Thus,\" [Francis William Pitt
Greenwood](F._W._P._Greenwood "wikilink") said in his sermon at
Freeman\'s funeral, \"the first Episcopal church in New England became
the first Unitarian church in the [New
World](New_World "wikilink").\"[^39]`{{refn|group=note|Freeman's 1787 ordination has also been appraised as the "formal beginning of Unitarianism in New England."<ref>{{harvnb|Wolff|1921}}</ref> Peaston also held that King's Chapel was the first New World Unitarian congregation.<ref>{{harvnb|Peaston|1940|p=22}}</ref>}}`{=mediawiki}
[thumb\|upright=1.3\|[F. W. P. Greenwood](F._W._P._Greenwood "wikilink")
edited three editions of the King\'s Chapel liturgy between 1828 and
1841 (title page from 1841 printing of fifth edition
pictured).](File:Greenwood_1841_liturgy.png "wikilink")

The 1785 prayer book\'s preface held that \"no Christian, it is
supposed, can take offence at, or find his conscience wounded\" by the
King\'s Chapel liturgy, and that \"the Trinitarian, the Unitarian, the
[Calvinist](Calvinism "wikilink"), and the
[Arminian](Arminianism "wikilink") will read nothing in it which can
give him any reasonable umbrage.\"[^40] Despite this, there was dissent
and controversy over the liturgy\'s publication.[^41] With Freeman still
not [ordained](ordination "wikilink"), he applied for ordination in the
new Anglican [Episcopal
Church](Episcopal_Church_(United_States) "wikilink") in 1786. This
application was rejected by Bishops [Samuel
Seabury](Samuel_Seabury "wikilink") and [Samuel
Provoost](Samuel_Provoost "wikilink") after Freeman refused to assent to
the Episcopalians\' own prayer book and the Trinitarian theology within
it.[^42]

The congregation decided to ordain Freeman themselves, devising and
performing their own \"solemn and appropriate form\" in November 1787,
with the senior [churchwarden](churchwarden "wikilink") performing the
[laying on of hands](laying_on_of_hands "wikilink") on Freeman.[^43]
This event ended King\'s Chapel\'s association with the Episcopal
Church.[^44] [Samuel J. May](Samuel_Joseph_May "wikilink") wrote that
Freeman was isolated during his early ministry through his exclusion
from the Episcopal Church and poor integration with nearby
Congregationalist ministers who were \"embarrassed\" by Freeman\'s use
of a prayer book and liturgies.[^45] Freeman retired from ministry in
1826.[^46]

Under the guidance of assistant minister Samuel Cary, a second edition
of the liturgy was published in 1811 which included services from other
congregations and reintroduced prayers removed in the 1785 edition.
Greenwood oversaw three revisions between 1828 and 1841, which sought to
improve the prayer book\'s [private
devotional](Christian_devotional_literature "wikilink") functionality
and introduced over 100 hymns to the psalter. Theses additions were
subsequently removed in the 1918 sixth edition by senior minister Howard
N. Brown.[^47] This version would remain largely unchanged through
1980,[^48] though minister Joseph Barth introduced services from 1955 to
1965 which were likely influenced by his
[Catholic](Catholic_Church "wikilink") upbringing.[^49] The congregation
also borrowed liturgical concepts from the Catholic Church\'s [Second
Vatican Council](Second_Vatican_Council "wikilink") reforms.[^50]

In 1980, the [vestry](vestry "wikilink") voted to create a committee of
nine lay members to revise a new prayer book. This revision process took
five years, culminating in the current ninth edition in 1986. The
congregation is now part of the [Unitarian Universalist
Association](Unitarian_Universalist_Association "wikilink").[^51]
King\'s Chapel is described as \"Unitarian in theology, Anglican in
worship, and congregational in governance,\"[^52] and its prayer book
stands in contrast with the preference for
[humanist](Humanism "wikilink")- and non-Christian-inspired forms of
radical free worship among modern Unitarians.[^53]

## Contents

Since [Thomas Cranmer](Thomas_Cranmer "wikilink") introduced the [first
*Book of Common Prayer*](Book_of_Common_Prayer_(1549) "wikilink") in
1549, there have been many editions of the *[Book of Common
Prayer](Book_of_Common_Prayer "wikilink")* published in more than 200
languages. According to historian David Ney, Cranmer hoped his prayer
book would grant the English people \"a robustly Trinitarian worship
which immersed them in the full counsel of the Word of God\".[^54]
Cranmer drew upon both the medieval [Sarum Use](Use_of_Sarum "wikilink")
and contemporary [Lutheran](Lutheranism "wikilink") and
[Calvinist](Calvinism "wikilink") forms in developing the liturgies
contained within the Anglican prayer book.[^55] The successive editions
of the Church of England\'s prayer books iterated on its contents, which
by the 1662 prayer book featured the [Holy Communion
office](Mass_(liturgy) "wikilink"), [Daily
Office](canonical_hours "wikilink"),
[lectionaries](Lectionary "wikilink"), [calendar of feasts and
fasts](Liturgical_year "wikilink"),
[ordinal](Ordinal_(liturgy) "wikilink"), psalter, and Thirty-nine
Articles. The 1662 prayer book also contained the rites for
[confirmation](confirmation "wikilink"), several forms of
[baptism](baptism "wikilink"), and burial.[^56] It was from the 1662
prayer book that the Unitarian and other Dissident prayer book
traditions found their basis.[^57]

Many Unitarian revisions of the Anglican prayer book drew upon
Lindsey\'s editions, mirroring the 1662 prayer book\'s structure if not
always its verbiage. The English Unitarian revisions of the period from
1774 until 1851 demonstrated little evidence that their compilers were
learned in [liturgics](liturgics "wikilink"), though their Unitarian
theology was strongly expressed. A commonality among Unitarian
liturgical texts was their Communion offices which expressed an extreme
[sacramentarian](Sacramentarians "wikilink") or
[memorialist](Memorialism "wikilink") theology of the
[Eucharist](Eucharist "wikilink").[^58]

### Clarke

Clarke\'s 1724 manuscript of alterations to the 1662 prayer book were
generally Unitarian and [Nontrinitarian](Nontrinitarianism "wikilink"),
with all Trinitarian formulae modified or removed.[^59] Clarke made
these alterations with a pen within his personal copy of the prayer
book.[^60] The alterations including deleting the *[Gloria
Patri](Gloria_Patri "wikilink")* and replacing it with his own doxology
that only addressed God the Father. He also rewrote portions of the
[Litany](Exhortation_and_Litany "wikilink") to direct prayers away from
the [Holy Spirit](Holy_Spirit_in_Christianity "wikilink") towards the
Father.[^61] The [Nicene Creed](Nicene_Creed "wikilink") was replaced
with a [psalm](psalm "wikilink"); the Athanasian Creed was removed.[^62]
Clarke first proposed his alterations to the baptism office in 1712,
leaving the [sign of the cross](sign_of_the_cross "wikilink") as an
option and introducing the 1689 *Liturgy of
Comprehension*`{{apostrophe}}`{=mediawiki}s permission that parents
might serve as [sponsors](Godparent "wikilink").[^63]

Clarke\'s ordinal deleted Trinitarian references at the conclusion of
prayers. He also adjusted the formulae for the ordinations of priests
and bishops, changing the impositions of hands to prayers. The hymn
\"[Come Holy Ghost](Veni_Creator_Spiritus "wikilink")\" in the
ordination of priests was supplanted with a psalm, while the wording in
the consecratory rite for the episcopate of \"fall to Prayer\" was made
\"offer up our
Prayers\".[^64]`{{refn|group=note|Disney's copy of Clarke's work was held in the [[British Museum]]'s collection by 1949.<ref>{{harvnb|Maxwell|1949|p=33}}</ref> Both Jasper and [[Paul F. Bradshaw]] refer to a manuscript copy in the British Library for their details of Clarke's alterations.<ref>{{harvnb|Jasper|1989|p=14}}; {{harvnb|Bradshaw|1971|p=106}}</ref>}}`{=mediawiki}

### Lindsey

![Essex Street Chapel during the 1874 centenary service celebrating the
first use of Lindsey\'s prayer book with the
congregation](images/Essex_Street_Chapel_1874.jpg "Essex Street Chapel during the 1874 centenary service celebrating the first use of Lindsey's prayer book with the congregation")
Lindsey\'s 1774 prayer book, which incorporated both his own and
Clarke\'s alterations to the 1662 prayer book, was tonally Unitarian
with some [Puritan](Puritanism "wikilink") influence. In order to
prevent the interpretation that a [priest](priest "wikilink") could
forgive sins, the [absolution](absolution "wikilink") at both
[Mattins](Matins "wikilink") and [Evensong](Evensong "wikilink") are
both replaced with the [Collect for
Purity](Collect_for_Purity "wikilink") and the Communion office is
rewritten as a prayer for God\'s forgiveness. The *[Te
Deum](Te_Deum "wikilink")*, *[Benedicite](Benedicite "wikilink")*,
*[Magnificat](Magnificat "wikilink")* and *[Nunc
Dimittis](Nunc_Dimittis "wikilink")* were all removed.[^65]
Additionally, the prefaces, Athanasian Creed,
[catechism](catechism "wikilink"), ordinal, and some
[collects](collect "wikilink") were removed.[^66] The [virgin birth of
Jesus](virgin_birth_of_Jesus "wikilink") was rejected as
\"unhistorical\" and [Satan](Satan "wikilink") no longer mentioned
within the Litany.[^67] Like Clarke, Lindsey presumed that [ante-Nicene
Christians](Christianity_in_the_ante-Nicene_period "wikilink")
subscribed to Unitarian views, thus preserving the [Apostles\'
Creed](Apostles'_Creed "wikilink") in this revision.[^68] However,
Lindsey eventually removed the Apostles\' Creed from his church services
in 1789.[^69]

Lindsey\'s prayer book emphasized the Daily Office, drawing upon
medieval Catholic practices and establishing non-Eucharistic offices as
the norm for Unitarian worship.[^70] The Communion office---sans the
[Prayer of Humble Access](Prayer_of_Humble_Access "wikilink"), [Lord\'s
Prayer](Lord's_Prayer "wikilink"), and Prayer of Thanksgiving---was
always led by Mattins. Lindsey similarly removed references to
[sacrifice](Sacerdotalism "wikilink") and the [Second
Coming](Second_Coming "wikilink"). Offices for private baptism, the
\"[Baptism of those of Riper Years](Believer's_baptism "wikilink")\",
and confirmation were removed and the [matrimonial](Marriage "wikilink")
office altered to included a longer exhortation.[^71] Some psalms were
excised, with [Isaac Watts](Isaac_Watts "wikilink") writing most of the
131 hymns and [metrical psalms](Metrical_psalter "wikilink") which were
added.[^72]

While Lindsey\'s omissions were extensive, they were not entirely
unusual among contemporary prayer book abridgments. It was not uncommon
for 18th-century English printers trying to keep expenses down to delete
material not conducive to devotional usage. Additionally, some of the
material removed in the original 1774 revised prayer book were
reintroduced in Lindsey\'s later editions, including within the 1791
edition that brought back offices for adult baptism and ordination as
well as a
catechism.[^73]`{{refn|group=note|[[Prime Minister of the United Kingdom]] and Unitarian [[Neville Chamberlain]] utilized the phrase "[[Peace for our time]]", a modified form of the phrase "peace in our time" which appears in the 1662 prayer book. It is possible that his familiarity with the phrase came from its retention within Lindsey's recension of the ''Book of Common Prayer'' and modified appearance within later Unitarian [[liturgical book|service books]].<ref>{{harvnb|Pulbrook|2013}}</ref>}}`{=mediawiki}

### King\'s Chapel

The first edition of the King\'s Chapel
liturgy`{{refn|group=note|The title page of the 1785 prayer book gave the full title as ''A Liturgy Collected Principally from the Book of Common Prayer for The Use of the First Episcopal Church in Boston; Together with the Psalter or Psalms of David'' and states it was printed by [[Peter Edes]] of [[State Street (Boston)|State Street]].<ref>{{harvnb|Chorley|1930|p=61}}</ref>}}`{=mediawiki}
closely followed the amendments within Clarke\'s prayer book.[^74]
Freeman\'s 1785 preface acknowledges that \"great assistance hath been
derived from the Judicious corrections of the Reverend Mr. Lindsey\" and
his prayer book revised according to \"the truly pious and justly
celebrated Doctor Samuel Clarke\".[^75] The Trinitarian *Gloria Patri*
was deleted, as were the Nicene and Athanasian Creeds.[^76] As political
considerations, \"A Prayer for the King\'s Majesty\" is replaced by \"A
Prayer for the Congress of the United States\" and the prayer for High
Court of Parliament became \"A Prayer for the Great and General Court\",
with *kingdom* supplanted by *Commonwealth* in the latter.[^77]
Freeman\'s [low churchmanship](low_church "wikilink") and the
congregation\'s [egalitarianism](egalitarianism "wikilink") saw
*minister* replace *priest* and *ordinance* replace
*[sacrament](sacrament "wikilink")*. A catechism written by Priestley,
who relocated to preach in [Pennsylvania](Pennsylvania "wikilink")
towards the end of his life, was included for teaching children.[^78]

Unlike Lindsey\'s prayer book, the King\'s Chapel prayer book retained
the *Benedicite* due to its biblical basis in [2
Corinthians](2_Corinthians "wikilink"). The text also differed in
keeping an altered *Te Deum*, as well as maintaining both the
*[Venite](Psalm_95#Christianity "wikilink")* and the General
Confession\'s \"there is no health in us.\" Freeman, writing to Lindsey
in 1786, described that \"Some defects and improprieties\" were retained
so that the King\'s Chapel congregation might \"omit the most
objectionable parts of the old service, the Athanasian prayers.\"
According to King Chapel minister Carl Scovel, Freeman\'s 1785 liturgy
appears \"quite traditional\" to the modern eye, with the Sunday offices
and lectionary largely similar to those of the 1662 prayer book.[^79]
![Three printings of the fifth edition King\'s Chapel prayer
book\|alt=Three copies from three printings of the fifth edition King\'s
Chapel prayer book laying atop one
another](images/Three_5th_edition_King's_Chapel_BCPs.jpg "Three printings of the fifth edition King's Chapel prayer book|alt=Three copies from three printings of the fifth edition King's Chapel prayer book laying atop one another")

Greenwood reported that the first edition of the King\'s Chapel liturgy
was immediately published after its approval and used until 1811, when
it was supplanted with the amended second edition. Greenwood, replacing
Freeman as pastor, guided the next three revisions;[^80] the 1828 third
edition added further changes that were themselves unchanged in the 1831
fourth edition, the latter of which added family services, prayers, and
devotional hymns.[^81] Greenwood also helmed a fifth edition in 1841.
Over the course of his revisions, Greenwood introduced over 100 hymns to
the psalter including those by Watts as well as
[Charles](Charles_Wesley "wikilink") and [John
Wesley](John_Wesley "wikilink").[^82]`{{refn|group=note|The title of an 1844 psalter, listed in the 38th edition, is given as ''A Collection of Psalms and Hymns for Christian Worship''.<ref>{{harvnb|''A Collection of Psalms and Hymns for Christian Worship''}}</ref>}}`{=mediawiki}

In the 1918 sixth edition, Brown removed almost all of Greenwood\'s
additions.[^83] In the same edition, Brown introduced the
*[Didache](Didache "wikilink")*---a previously lost [early
Christian](Early_Christianity "wikilink") text rediscovered in 1900--to
the prayer book, though Scovel believed this addition was never used
during King\'s Chapel services. The 1925 seventh edition differed very
little from the sixth, with minor alterations to language within the
Communion service. Though not formally published, a notional \"eighth
edition\" developed between 1955 and 1965 under minister Joseph Barth,
introducing additional services such as the imposition of ashes on [Ash
Wednesday](Ash_Wednesday "wikilink"). Barth and his services were likely
influenced by his Catholic upbringing.[^84]

The latter forms remained in use through 1980, by which time the
minister utilized the [Common
Lectionary](Revised_Common_Lectionary "wikilink"). This lectionary would
be formally integrated into the 1986 ninth
edition,`{{refn|group=note|The full title of the 1986 ninth edition King's Chapel prayer book is ''Book of Common Prayer According to the Use in King's Chapel''.<ref>{{harvnb|King's Chapel|1986}}</ref>}}`{=mediawiki}
as would Evensong and several accreted services including midweek
prayers. The entire psalter according to the King James Version with
minor [Revised Standard
Version](Revised_Standard_Version "wikilink")-based changes and more
than 30 hymns were also included in this revision. Most of the 1662
prayer book\'s language was retained, but the revising committee made
\"modest changes\" to remove [male generic
terms](Androcentrism#Generic_male_language "wikilink").[^85]

## Influence on non-Unitarian liturgies

[thumb\|right\|upright=1.5\|Theophilus Lindsey\'s 1774 prayer book
*(left)* bears many similarities with the 1784 *Sunday Service*
*(right)* by John Wesley *(center)*.\|alt=A painted portrait of John
Wesley between the title pages of Lindsey\'s 1774 prayer book and
Wesley\'s 1784 Sunday
Service](File:Lindsey,_Wesley,_Sunday_Service.png "wikilink") While few
ministers followed Lindsey in resigning from the Church of England, many
shared his theology and considered his 1774 prayer book a modernization
of the 1662 liturgy.[^86] Through the 19th century, new editions of
Lindsey\'s prayer book and derivatives were printed, with the Athanasian
Creed remaining their primary objection.[^87] With Lindsey\'s prayer
book as inspiration, 15 liturgies based on the 1662 prayer book were
published in England between 1792 and 1854 with similar Unitarian
\"modernizations\".[^88]`{{refn|group=note|In total, 54 liturgies were published in England between 1713 and 1854. The majority were from Nonconformists and some were formulated independently from the 1662 prayer book. While some of the liturgies share of their primary objectives with those of Clarke and Lindsey, others were focused on pan-Protestant "comprehension" through the excision of "[[Romanism]]".<ref>{{harvnb|Calcote|1977|p=279}}</ref>}}`{=mediawiki}
Peaston assessed these liturgies as \"remarkable for the rationality of
their thought, and the tediousness of their expression. They would seem
indeed to have been in the tradition of [John
Locke](John_Locke "wikilink").\"[^89]

John Wesley created his own revision of the 1662 prayer book in 1784 for
American [Methodists](Methodism "wikilink") entitled *[The Sunday
Service of the Methodists in North
America](The_Sunday_Service_of_the_Methodists "wikilink")*. Wesley, who
considered the 1662 prayer book strong in its \"solid, scriptural,
rational Piety\", is known to have been interested in producing a
revised prayer book since 1736.[^90] Clarke, Lindsey, Jones, and Whiston
are among the prayer book revisionists that Wesley explicitly named in
his personal writings and Wesley was familiar with Lindsey through the
Feathers Tavern Association.[^91] While Wesley never said whether he
read Lindsey\'s prayer book, the 1784 *Sunday Service* contained many
parallels with the 1774 revision,[^92] including omitting a confirmation
rite.[^93]

### Episcopal Church

After approving the 1785 liturgy, members of King\'s Chapel held a
measure of expectation that other American Anglican congregations would
follow their lead in issuing their own revised prayer books.[^94] Rector
at Trinity Church [Samuel
Parker](Samuel_Parker_(bishop_of_Massachusetts) "wikilink") had pressed
for liturgical changes beyond those related to politics at the
[Middletown](Middletown,_Connecticut "wikilink") Convocation in August
1785, with Seabury agreeing that some of the liturgical changes adopted
at Trinity Church would be part of the new prayer book.[^95] The
Unitarians of King\'s Chapel hoped that this new prayer book would match
their theology, though it is unclear if the Middletown Convocation had
access to the chapel\'s prayer book.[^96] The Episcopal Church
authorized a committee with broad powers to revise a prayer book.[^97]
This committee included [William
White](William_White_(bishop_of_Pennsylvania) "wikilink"), a
Pennsylvanian clergy who favoured Locke\'s thought.[^98] The adoption of
Freeman\'s liturgy at King Chapel spurred White to privately
acknowledged the King\'s Chapel congregation\'s actions as irregular,
with White defending Trinitarian orthodoxy but also admitting his own
desires that the Episcopal Church\'s revised prayer book remove
non-scriptural doctrines and creeds.[^99]

The Episcopal Church committee published their proposed prayer book on 1
April 1786.[^100] The text reflected [English
Deist](Deism_in_England_and_France_in_the_18th_century "wikilink")
influence and featured substantial Unitarian leanings.[^101] This
proposed prayer book removed the Nicene and Athanasian Creeds,[^102]
omitted the \"[He descended into hell](Harrowing_of_Hell "wikilink")\"
from the Apostles\' Creed, and reduced praise to the Trinity.[^103]
While the proposed Episcopal book was certainly a more orthodox,
conservative revision than the King\'s Chapel prayer book and featured
fewer omissions than Wesley\'s liturgy, Wesley\'s work was more explicit
in expressing Trinitarian doctrine.[^104] Concurring with Seabury and
[Edward Bass](Edward_Bass "wikilink"), Parker took a hardline position
against the 1786 proposed prayer book\'s \"irregularly made revisions\";
historian [Paul V. Marshall](Paul_V._Marshall "wikilink") attributes
this to Parker\'s familiarity with the King\'s Chapel prayer book.[^105]
The 1786 proposed text did not last and a more conservative prayer book
revision was approved by the General Convention in 1789 and introduced
in
1790.[^106]`{{refn|group=note|As the Episcopal Church hoped that English bishops might consecrate some of its clergymen, the English episcopates' staunch opposition to the proposed 1786 American prayer book proved decisive in its ultimate rejection.<ref>{{harvnb|Peaston|1940|p=22}}</ref>}}`{=mediawiki}

## See also

-   [Dr Williams\'s Library](Dr_Williams's_Library "wikilink"), a
    British collection which includes many Unitarian and Nonconformist
    revised editions of the Anglican prayer book
-   [Doctrine of the Trinity Act
    1813](Doctrine_of_the_Trinity_Act_1813 "wikilink"), a British act of
    Parliament granting toleration of Unitarian worship
-   [Joseph Priestley and
    Dissent](Joseph_Priestley_and_Dissent "wikilink"), on Priestley\'s
    involvement in English Dissent and Unitarianism
-   [Savoy Conference](Savoy_Conference "wikilink"), the 1661 summit
    that culminated in the 1662 prayer book

## Notes

```{=mediawiki}
{{notelist|group=note}}
```
## References

### Citations

```{=mediawiki}
{{reflist}}
```
### Primary sources

```{=mediawiki}
{{refbegin}}
```
-   ```{=mediawiki}
    {{cite book|title=Book of Common Prayer According to the Use in King's Chapel|date=1986|location=Boston|publisher=[[King's Chapel]]|ref={{harvid|King's Chapel|1986}}}}
    ```

-   ```{=mediawiki}
    {{cite book|title=A Collection of Psalms and Hymns for Christian Worship|editor=[[F. W. P. Greenwood|Greenwood, F.W.P.]]|date=1844|edition=38th|location=Boston|publisher=Charles J. Hendee and Jenks & Palmer|ref={{harvid|''A Collection of Psalms and Hymns for Christian Worship''}}}}
    ```

```{=mediawiki}
{{refend}}
```
### Secondary sources

```{=mediawiki}
{{refbegin|2}}
```
-   ```{=mediawiki}
    {{cite book|title=The Anglican Ordinal: Its History and Development From the Reformation to the Present Day|first=Paul F.|last=Bradshaw|author-link=Paul F. Bradshaw|date=1971|publisher=[[Alcuin Club]], [[Society for the Promotion of Christian Knowledge]]|location=London|series=Alcuin Club Collections No. 53}}
    ```

-   ```{=mediawiki}
    {{cite web|url=http://www.kings-chapel.org/prayerbookreforms.html|title=The Book of Common Prayer: History of Reforms|work=Independent Country, Independent Church: American Independence, James Freeman, and King’s Chapel’s 1780s Theological Revolution|publisher=[[King's Chapel]]|location=[[Boston]]|access-date=5 February 2023|ref={{harvid|"History of Reforms"}}}}
    ```

-   ```{=mediawiki}
    {{cite book|title=Encyclopedia of American Women and Religion|last=Benowitz|first=June Melby|location=[[Santa Barbara, California|Santa Barbara]], [[California|CA]]|publisher=ABC-CLIO, LLC|date=2017|volume=I|isbn=978-1-4408-4822-3}}
    ```

-   ```{=mediawiki}
    {{cite journal|url=https://www.jstor.org/stable/42973565|title=The Proposed Prayer Book Of 1785|journal=Historical Magazine of the Protestant Episcopal Church|publisher=[[Historical Society of the Episcopal Church]]|first=A. Dean|last=Calcote|date=September 1977|volume=46|number=3|pages=275–295 |jstor=42973565}}
    ```

-   ```{=mediawiki}
    {{cite EB1911|wstitle=Clarke, Samuel|volume=6|ref={{harvid|''Encyclopædia Britannica''|1911}}}}
    ```

-   ```{=mediawiki}
    {{cite book|title=The New American Prayer Book: Its History and Contents|first=E. Clowes|last=Chorley|date=1930|location=[[New York City]]|publisher=[[Macmillan Publishers|The Macmillan Company]]}}
    ```

-   ```{=mediawiki}
    {{cite book|title=A History of Anglican Liturgy|author-link=Geoffrey Cuming|last=Cuming|first=G.&nbsp;J.|publisher=St. Martin's Press, [[Macmillan Publishers]]|date=1969|edition=1st|location=London}}
    ```

-   ```{=mediawiki}
    {{cite web|url=https://www.harvardsquarelibrary.org/biographies/james-freeman-1759-1835/|title=Freeman, James (1759–1835)|publisher=Harvard Square Library, [[First Parish in Cambridge]]|location=[[Cambridge, Massachusetts|Cambridge]], [[Massachusetts|MA]]|access-date=5 February 2023|archive-url=https://web.archive.org/web/20220406232957/https://www.harvardsquarelibrary.org/biographies/james-freeman-1759-1835/|archive-date=6 April 2022|url-status=live|ref={{harvid|Harvard Square Library}}}}
    ```

-   ```{=mediawiki}
    {{cite book|title=A History of King's Chapel, in Boston, the First Episcopal Church in New England: Comprising Notices of the Introduction of Episcopacy Into the Northern Colonies|last=Greenwood|first=Francis William Pitt|author-link=F. W. P. Greenwood|location=[[Boston]]|date=1833|publisher=Carter, Hendee & Company|url=https://books.google.com/books?id=tQATAAAAYAAJ}}
    ```

-   ```{=mediawiki}
    {{cite web|url=http://www.kings-chapel.org/prayerbookexhibit-575815-647828.html|title=The History of the Prayer Book|publisher=[[King's Chapel]]|location=[[Boston]]|access-date=5 February 2023|archive-url=https://web.archive.org/web/20230206054658/http://www.kings-chapel.org/prayerbookexhibit-575815-647828.html|archive-date=6 February 2023|url-status=live|ref={{harvid|"The History of the Prayer Book"}}}}
    ```

-   ```{=mediawiki}
    {{cite book|url=http://www.kings-chapel.org/religioushistoryexhibit.html|title=Independent Country, Independent Church: American Independence, James Freeman, and King's Chapel's 1780s Theological Revolution|publisher=[[King's Chapel]]|location=[[Boston]]|access-date=5 February 2023|ref={{harvid|''Independent Country, Independent Church''}}}}
    ```

-   ```{=mediawiki}
    {{cite web|url=https://archives-manuscripts.dartmouth.edu/agents/people/7732|title=Freeman, James, 1759–1835|publisher=[[Dartmouth College]]|location=[[Hanover, New Hampshire|Hanover]], [[New Hampshire|NH]]|access-date=6 February 2023|ref={{harvid|Dartmouth}}}}
    ```

-   ```{=mediawiki}
    {{cite book|title=The Development of the Anglican Liturgy, 1662–1980|date=1989|last=Jasper|first=R.C.D.|author-link=Ronald Jasper|publisher=[[Society for the Promotion of Christian Knowledge]]|location=London}}
    ```

-   ```{=mediawiki}
    {{cite journal|title=Unitarians and the Book of Common Prayer in Nineteenth-Century Britain|first=Michael|last=Ledger-Lomas|date=September 2013|volume=43|issue=2|journal=Studia Liturgica|pages=211–228 |publisher=[[SAGE Publications]]|doi=10.1177/003932071304300202|s2cid=165907637 }}
    ```

-   ```{=mediawiki}
    {{cite book|title=The New Westminster Dictionary of Liturgy and Worship|editor-first=J.G.|editor-last=Davies|publisher=[[Westminster John Knox Press|Westminster Press]]|location=[[Philadelphia]]|chapter=Unitarian Worship|first=A.J.|last=Long|date=1986|isbn=0-664-21270-0}}
    ```

-   ```{=mediawiki}
    {{cite book|title=One, Catholic, and Apostolic: Samuel Seabury and the Early Episcopal Church|author-link=Paul V. Marshall|first=Paul Victor|last=Marshall|publisher=Church Publishing Company|location=New York City|date=2004|isbn=0-89869-447-7}}
    ```

-   ```{=mediawiki}
    {{cite book|url=http://anglicanhistory.org/bcp/maxwell1949.pdf|title=The Book of Common Prayer and the Worship of the Non-Anglican Churches|last=Maxwell|first=William D.|publisher=[[Oxford University Press]]|location=[[Oxford]]|date=1949|series=Friends of Dr. William's Library|via=Project Canterbury}}
    ```

-   ```{=mediawiki}
    {{cite journal|title=The Genesis of the Unitarian Church and the Book of Common Prayer|first=David|last=Ney|journal=[[Anglican and Episcopal History]]|publisher=[[Historical Society of the Episcopal Church]]|location=[[Austin, Texas|Austin]], [[Texas|TX]]|date=June 2021|volume=90|issue=2|url=https://www.proquest.com/docview/2557870193|id={{ProQuest|2557870193}} |via=[[ProQuest]]}}
    ```

-   ```{=mediawiki}
    {{cite book|url=https://www.colonialsociety.org/node/1088|title=The Records of Trinity Church, Boston 1728–1830|publisher=[[Colonial Society of Massachusetts]]|date=1980|editor-first1=Andrew|editor-last1=Oliver|editor-first2=James Bishop|editor-last2=Peabody|first=James Bishop|last=Peabody|chapter=Historical Introduction|location=[[Boston]]|series=Publications of The Colonial Society of Massachusetts|volume=LV}}
    ```

-   ```{=mediawiki}
    {{cite book|url=https://archive.org/details/prayerbookreform0000peas/page/n5/mode/2up|title=The Prayer Book Reform Movement in the XVIIIth Century|first=A..&nbsp;Elliott|last=Peaston|publisher=[[Wiley-Blackwell|Basil Blackwell & Mott Ltd.]]|location=[[Oxford]]|date=1940|via=[[Internet Archive]]}}
    ```

-   ```{=mediawiki}
    {{cite journal|title=The Revision of the Prayer Book by Dr. Samuel Clarke|last=Peaston|first=A..&nbsp;E.|date=1 January 1959|journal=Transactions of the Unitarian Historical Society|volume=12|issue=1|url=https://www.proquest.com/openview/42ec81a562ff925b6440049f14429a52/1?pq-origsite=gscholar&cbl=1820202|page=27|via=[[ProQuest]]|url-access=subscription}}
    ```

-   ```{=mediawiki}
    {{cite news|title=Peace in our time|work=[[Irish Times]]|date=23 October 2013|page=15|last=Pulbrook|first=Martin|url=https://www.proquest.com/docview/1445393848|id={{ProQuest|1445393848}} |via=[[ProQuest]]}}
    ```

-   ```{=mediawiki}
    {{cite book|url=http://archive.org/details/historybookcomm00pullgoog|title=The History of the Book of Common Prayer|last=Pullan|first=Leighton|edition=3rd|series=The Oxford Library of Practical Theology|editor-last1=Newbolt|editor-first1=W.C.E.|editor-last2=Stone|editor-first2=Darwell|publisher=[[Longman|Longmans, Green, and Co.]]|date=1901|location=London}}
    ```

-   ```{=mediawiki}
    {{cite book|title=[[The Oxford Guide to the Book of Common Prayer: A Worldwide Survey]]|editor-last1=Hefling|editor-first1=Charles|editor-last2=Shattuck|editor-first2=Cynthia|date=2006|publisher=[[Oxford University Press]]|location=[[Oxford]]|isbn=978-0-19-529762-1|last=Scovel|first=Carl|chapter=King's Chapel and the Unitarians}}
    ```

-   ```{=mediawiki}
    {{cite book|chapter=Anglicans and Dissenters|first=Bryan D.|last=Spinks|author-link=Bryan D. Spinks|title=[[The Oxford History of Christian Worship]]|editor-last1=Wainwright|editor-first1=Geoffrey|editor-link=Geoffrey Wainwright|editor-last2=Westerfield Tucker|editor-first2=Karen B.|editor-link2=Karen B. Westerfield Tucker|isbn=978-0-19-513886-3|date=2006|publisher=[[Oxford University Press]]|location=[[Oxford]]|page=519}}
    ```

-   ```{=mediawiki}
    {{cite DNB|wstitle=Clarke, Samuel (1675–1729)|volume=10|ref={{harvid|''Dictionary of National Biography''|1887}}}}
    ```

-   ```{=mediawiki}
    {{cite web|url=https://colonialnorthamerica.library.harvard.edu/spotlight/cna/catalog/990052150670203941|work=Colonial North America at Harvard Library|title=Student mathematical textbook of James Freeman, 1774: James Freeman's manuscript, September 25, 1774|publisher=[[Harvard Library]]|location=[[Cambridge, Massachusetts|Cambridge]], [[Massachusetts|MA]]|access-date=9 February 2023|archive-url=https://web.archive.org/web/20230208205933/https://colonialnorthamerica.library.harvard.edu/spotlight/cna/catalog/990052150670203941|archive-date=8 February 2023|url-status=live|ref={{harvid|Harvard Library}}}}
    ```

-   ```{=mediawiki}
    {{cite book|title=The American Book of Common Prayer: Its Origin and Development|publisher=[[Oxford University Press]]|date=1949|first1=John Wallace|last1=Suter|first2=George Julius|last2=Cleveland|location=[[New York City]]}}
    ```

-   ```{=mediawiki}
    {{cite SEP |url-id=clarke|title=Samuel Clarke|author-last1=Vailati|author-first1=Ezio|author-last2=Yenter|author-first2=Timothy|date=Winter 2021}}
    ```

-   ```{=mediawiki}
    {{cite news|url=https://www.nytimes.com/1985/12/22/magazine/returning-to-church.html|title=Returning to Church|work=[[New York Times]]|author-link=Dan Wakefield|last=Wakefield|first=Dan|date=22 December 1985|via=New York Times Archives}}
    ```

-   ```{=mediawiki}
    {{cite journal|url=https://archives.gcah.org/bitstream/handle/10516/6101/MH-1996-July-Tucker.pdf?sequence=1&isAllowed=y|title=John Wesley's Prayer Book Revision: The Text in Context|last=Westerfield Tucker|first=Karen B.|author-link=Karen B. Westerfield Tucker|date=July 1996|journal=Methodist History|volume=34|number=4|via=General Commission on Archives and History, [[United Methodist Church]]|archive-url=https://web.archive.org/web/20220417185319/https://archives.gcah.org/bitstream/handle/10516/6101/MH-1996-July-Tucker.pdf?sequence=1&isAllowed=y|archive-date=17 April 2022|url-status=live}}
    ```

-   ```{=mediawiki}
    {{cite journal|title=The Sleeping Habits of Matter and Spirit: Samuel Clarke and Anthony Collins on the Immortality of the Soul|last=Wigelsworth|first=Jeffery R.|journal=Past Imperfect|date=2001–2003|volume=9|page=5|publisher=[[University of Alberta]]|url=https://journals.library.ualberta.ca/pi/index.php/pi/article/view/1429|ref={{harvid|Wigelsworth|2003}}|doi=10.21971/P7D01D|doi-access=free}}
    ```

-   ```{=mediawiki}
    {{cite wikisource|wslink=The Cambridge History of American Literature/Book II/Chapter XXII|work=Cambridge History of American Literature|publisher=[[Cambridge University Press]]|location=[[Cambridge]]||title=Chapter XXII: Divines and Moralists, 1783–1860|volume=2|date=1921|first=Samuel Lee|last=Wolff|editor-first1=William Peterfield|editor-last1=Trent|editor-link1=William Peterfield Trent|editor-first2=John|editor-last2=Erskine|editor-link2=John Erskine (educator)|editor-first3=Stuart P.|editor-last3=Sherman|editor-link3=Stuart P. Sherman|editor-first4=Carl|editor-last4=Van Doren|editor-link4=Carl Van Doren}}
    ```

```{=mediawiki}
{{refend}}
```
## External links

-   ```{=mediawiki}
    {{cite book|url=https://books.google.com/books?id=tQIjtwEACAAJ|title=The Book of Common Praywr Reformed According to the Plan of the Late Dr. Samuel Clarke, Together with the Psalter or Psalms of David|location=London|date=1774|author-link=Theophilus Lindsey|first=Theophilus|last=Lindsey|ref=none}}
    ```
    Lindsey\'s revision of Clarke\'s prayer book.

-   ```{=mediawiki}
    {{cite book|url=https://books.google.com/books?id=ye4CAAAAQAAJ|title=Devotional Offices for Public Worship. Collected from Various Services, in Use Among Protestant Dissenters. To which are Added, Two Services, Chiefly Selected from the Book of Common Prayer|location=[[Salisbury]]|date=1794|publisher=C. Collins|ref=none}}
    ```
    An English Nonconformist prayer book revision that post-dates
    Lindsey\'s prayer book but was not in Lindsey\'s tradition.

-   [First edition of the King\'s Chapel
    Liturgy](http://justus.anglican.org/resources/bcp/kings_chapel1785.pdf)
    and
    [Psalter](http://justus.anglican.org/resources/bcp/kings_chapel1785-Psalter.pdf).
    (1785). [Boston](Boston "wikilink"): Peter Edes. Scanned copies of
    the first King\'s Chapel prayer book and psalter.

## Further reading

-   ```{=mediawiki}
    {{cite book|title=James Freeman and Boston's Religious Revolution|first=Margaret Barry|last=Chinkes|location=[[Glade Valley, North Carolina|Glade Valley]], [[North Carolina|NC]]|publisher=Glade Valley Books|date=1991}}
    ```
    A history of Freeman and King\'s Chapel that Paul V. Marshall
    appraised as \"a carefully researched monograph\".

-   Foote, Henry Wilder; [Clarke, James
    Freeman](James_Freeman_Clarke "wikilink") (1885). [*The Centenary of
    the King\'s Chapel
    Liturgy*](https://books.google.com/books?id=9zRKAAAAMAAJ). Boston:
    Press of George H. Ellis. A history of King\'s Chapel by members of
    the congregation.

-   ```{=mediawiki}
    {{cite journal|url=https://www.proquest.com/openview/cac6e5c71e972ffb4f5ba48e510b374c/1?cbl=1820202&pq-origsite=gscholar|title=The Unitarian liturgical tradition|journal=Transactions of the Unitarian Historical Society|last=Peaston|first=Alexander Elliott|location=London|publisher=Unitarian Historical Society|volume=12|number=2|date=1 October 1976|via=[[ProQuest]]|url-access=subscription|ref=none}}
    ```
    A survey of Unitarian worship including prayer book revisions.

```{=mediawiki}
{{Unitarian, Universalist, and Unitarian Universalist topics}}
```
```{=mediawiki}
{{Anglican liturgical books}}
```
```{=mediawiki}
{{Portalbar|Books|Christianity|England|History|Massachusetts}}
```
[Category:1724 non-fiction
books](Category:1724_non-fiction_books "wikilink") [Category:1774
non-fiction books](Category:1774_non-fiction_books "wikilink")
[Category:1785 non-fiction
books](Category:1785_non-fiction_books "wikilink") [Category:1986
non-fiction books](Category:1986_non-fiction_books "wikilink")
[Category:1724 in
Christianity](Category:1724_in_Christianity "wikilink") [Category:1774
in Christianity](Category:1774_in_Christianity "wikilink")
[Category:1785 in
Christianity](Category:1785_in_Christianity "wikilink") [Category:1986
in Christianity](Category:1986_in_Christianity "wikilink")
[Category:1774 in England](Category:1774_in_England "wikilink")
[Category:1785 in
Massachusetts](Category:1785_in_Massachusetts "wikilink")
[Category:18th-century Christian
texts](Category:18th-century_Christian_texts "wikilink")
[Category:18th-century
manuscripts](Category:18th-century_manuscripts "wikilink")
[Category:Book of Common
Prayer](Category:Book_of_Common_Prayer "wikilink")
[Category:Christianity in
Boston](Category:Christianity_in_Boston "wikilink") [Category:English
Dissenters](Category:English_Dissenters "wikilink") [Category:Episcopal
Church in
Massachusetts](Category:Episcopal_Church_in_Massachusetts "wikilink")
[Category:Unitarianism](Category:Unitarianism "wikilink")

[^1]:
    ```{=mediawiki}
    {{harvnb|Maxwell|1949|pp=16–17, 31–32}}
    ```

[^2]:
    ```{=mediawiki}
    {{harvnb|Maxwell|1949|pp=17–18}}
    ```

[^3]:
    ```{=mediawiki}
    {{harvnb|Peaston|1959}}
    ```
    ; `{{harvnb|Long|1986|p=513}}`{=mediawiki}

[^4]:
    ```{=mediawiki}
    {{harvnb|Scovel|2006|p=214}}
    ```
    ; `{{harvnb|''Encyclopædia Britannica''|1911}}`{=mediawiki}

[^5]:
    ```{=mediawiki}
    {{harvnb|Vailati|Yenter|2021}}
    ```

[^6]:
    ```{=mediawiki}
    {{harvnb|Jasper|1989|p=14}}
    ```

[^7]:
    ```{=mediawiki}
    {{harvnb|Scovel|2006|p=214}}
    ```
    ; `{{harvnb|Peaston|1959}}`{=mediawiki}

[^8]:
    ```{=mediawiki}
    {{harvnb|Peaston|1959}}
    ```
    ; `{{harvnb|Jasper|1989|p=15}}`{=mediawiki}

[^9]:
    ```{=mediawiki}
    {{harvnb|Jasper|1989|p=15}}
    ```

[^10]:
    ```{=mediawiki}
    {{harvnb|Peaston|1959}}
    ```
    ; `{{harvnb|Cuming|1969|p=178}}`{=mediawiki}

[^11]:
    ```{=mediawiki}
    {{harvnb|Jasper|1989|p=17}}
    ```
    ; `{{harvnb|Spinks|2006|p=519}}`{=mediawiki};
    `{{harvnb|Maxwell|1949|p=33}}`{=mediawiki}

[^12]:
    ```{=mediawiki}
    {{harvnb|Ney|2021|pp=149–150}}
    ```

[^13]:
    ```{=mediawiki}
    {{harvnb|Cuming|1969|pp=177–178}}
    ```
    ; `{{harvnb|Long|1986|p=514}}`{=mediawiki};
    `{{harvnb|Westerfield Tucker|1996|p=244}}`{=mediawiki}

[^14]:
    ```{=mediawiki}
    {{harvnb|Jasper|1989|p=17}}
    ```

[^15]:
    ```{=mediawiki}
    {{harvnb|Long|1986|p=514}}
    ```
    ; `{{harvnb|Ney|2021|p=150}}`{=mediawiki}

[^16]:
    ```{=mediawiki}
    {{harvnb|Ney|2021|p=152}}
    ```

[^17]:
    ```{=mediawiki}
    {{harvnb|Peaston|1940|p=83}}
    ```

[^18]:
    ```{=mediawiki}
    {{harvnb|Ney|2021|p=152}}
    ```

[^19]:
    ```{=mediawiki}
    {{harvnb|Long|1986|p=514}}
    ```

[^20]:
    ```{=mediawiki}
    {{harvnb|Maxwell|1949|p=20}}
    ```

[^21]:
    ```{=mediawiki}
    {{harvnb|Ledger-Lomas|2013|p=214}}
    ```

[^22]:
    ```{=mediawiki}
    {{harvnb|Ledger-Lomas|2013|pp=211–212}}
    ```

[^23]:
    ```{=mediawiki}
    {{harvnb|Ledger-Lomas|2013|p=214}}
    ```

[^24]:
    ```{=mediawiki}
    {{harvnb|Scovel|2006|p=214}}
    ```
    ; `{{harvnb|Harvard Square Library}}`{=mediawiki}

[^25]:
    ```{=mediawiki}
    {{harvnb|Chorley|1930|p=60}}
    ```
    ; `{{harvnb|Scovel|2006|p=214}}`{=mediawiki}

[^26]:
    ```{=mediawiki}
    {{harvnb|Harvard Square Library}}
    ```

[^27]:
    ```{=mediawiki}
    {{harvnb|''Independent Country, Independent Church''}}
    ```
    ; `{{harvnb|Scovel|2006|p=214}}`{=mediawiki}

[^28]:
    ```{=mediawiki}
    {{harvnb|Greenwood|1833|p=135}}
    ```

[^29]:
    ```{=mediawiki}
    {{harvnb|Chorley|1930|p=60}}
    ```

[^30]:
    ```{=mediawiki}
    {{harvnb|Suter|Cleveland|1949|p=23}}
    ```

[^31]:
    ```{=mediawiki}
    {{harvnb|Chorley|1930|p=60}}
    ```

[^32]:
    ```{=mediawiki}
    {{harvnb|Scovel|2006|pp=214–215}}
    ```
    ; `{{harvnb|Greenwood|1833|p=136}}`{=mediawiki}

[^33]:
    ```{=mediawiki}
    {{harvnb|"History of Reforms"}}
    ```

[^34]:
    ```{=mediawiki}
    {{harvnb|"The History of the Prayer Book"}}
    ```

[^35]:
    ```{=mediawiki}
    {{harvnb|Greenwood|1833|p=138}}
    ```

[^36]:
    ```{=mediawiki}
    {{harvnb|"The History of the Prayer Book"}}
    ```
    ; `{{harvnb|Wolff|1921}}`{=mediawiki}

[^37]:
    ```{=mediawiki}
    {{harvnb|Harvard Square Library}}
    ```

[^38]:
    ```{=mediawiki}
    {{harvnb|Scovel|2006|p=214}}
    ```

[^39]:
    ```{=mediawiki}
    {{harvnb|Harvard Square Library}}
    ```

[^40]:
    ```{=mediawiki}
    {{harvnb|Chorley|1930|p=62}}
    ```

[^41]:
    ```{=mediawiki}
    {{harvnb|Scovel|2006|p=215}}
    ```

[^42]:
    ```{=mediawiki}
    {{harvnb|Harvard Square Library}}
    ```

[^43]:
    ```{=mediawiki}
    {{harvnb|Greenwood|1833|pp=140–141}}
    ```

[^44]:
    ```{=mediawiki}
    {{harvnb|Chorley|1930|p=62}}
    ```

[^45]:
    ```{=mediawiki}
    {{harvnb|Harvard Square Library}}
    ```

[^46]:
    ```{=mediawiki}
    {{harvnb|Harvard Library}}
    ```

[^47]:
    ```{=mediawiki}
    {{harvnb|"The History of the Prayer Book"}}
    ```

[^48]:
    ```{=mediawiki}
    {{harvnb|Scovel|2006|p=216}}
    ```

[^49]:
    ```{=mediawiki}
    {{harvnb|"The History of the Prayer Book"}}
    ```

[^50]:
    ```{=mediawiki}
    {{harvnb|Scovel|2006|p=216}}
    ```

[^51]:
    ```{=mediawiki}
    {{harvnb|Scovel|2006|pp=216–217}}
    ```

[^52]:
    ```{=mediawiki}
    {{harvnb|Wakefield|1985|p=17}}
    ```

[^53]:
    ```{=mediawiki}
    {{harvnb|Long|1986|p=513}}
    ```

[^54]:
    ```{=mediawiki}
    {{harvnb|Ney|2021|p=136}}
    ```

[^55]:
    ```{=mediawiki}
    {{harvnb|Maxwell|1949|p=6}}
    ```

[^56]:
    ```{=mediawiki}
    {{harvnb|Ney|2021|pp=137, 152–153}}
    ```

[^57]:
    ```{=mediawiki}
    {{harvnb|Ney|2021|p=136}}
    ```

[^58]:
    ```{=mediawiki}
    {{harvnb|Maxwell|1949|p=20}}
    ```

[^59]:
    ```{=mediawiki}
    {{harvnb|Cuming|1969|p=176}}
    ```

[^60]:
    ```{=mediawiki}
    {{harvnb|Ney|2021}}
    ```

[^61]:
    ```{=mediawiki}
    {{harvnb|Scovel|2006|p=214}}
    ```

[^62]:
    ```{=mediawiki}
    {{harvnb|Cuming|1969|p=176}}
    ```
    ; `{{harvnb|Jasper|1989|p=14}}`{=mediawiki}

[^63]:
    ```{=mediawiki}
    {{harvnb|Jasper|1989|p=15}}
    ```

[^64]:
    ```{=mediawiki}
    {{harvnb|Bradshaw|1971|p=106}}
    ```

[^65]:
    ```{=mediawiki}
    {{harvnb|Cuming|1969|p=178}}
    ```

[^66]:
    ```{=mediawiki}
    {{harvnb|Ney|2021|pp=152–153}}
    ```

[^67]:
    ```{=mediawiki}
    {{harvnb|Long|1986|p=514}}
    ```

[^68]:
    ```{=mediawiki}
    {{harvnb|Ney|2021|p=155}}
    ```

[^69]:
    ```{=mediawiki}
    {{harvnb|Marshall|2004|p=144}}
    ```

[^70]:
    ```{=mediawiki}
    {{harvnb|Long|1986|p=514}}
    ```

[^71]:
    ```{=mediawiki}
    {{harvnb|Cuming|1969|p=179}}
    ```

[^72]:
    ```{=mediawiki}
    {{harvnb|Marshall|2004|p=117}}
    ```

[^73]:
    ```{=mediawiki}
    {{harvnb|Ney|2021|p=153}}
    ```

[^74]:
    ```{=mediawiki}
    {{harvnb|Harvard Square Library}}
    ```

[^75]:
    ```{=mediawiki}
    {{harvnb|Chorley|1930|p=61}}
    ```

[^76]:
    ```{=mediawiki}
    {{harvnb|Chorley|1930|p=62}}
    ```

[^77]:
    ```{=mediawiki}
    {{harvnb|Peaston|1940|p=85}}
    ```

[^78]:
    ```{=mediawiki}
    {{harvnb|Scovel|2006|p=215}}
    ```

[^79]:
    ```{=mediawiki}
    {{harvnb|Scovel|2006|p=215}}
    ```

[^80]:
    ```{=mediawiki}
    {{harvnb|"The History of the Prayer Book"}}
    ```

[^81]:
    ```{=mediawiki}
    {{harvnb|Greenwood|1833|p=139}}
    ```

[^82]:
    ```{=mediawiki}
    {{harvnb|"The History of the Prayer Book"}}
    ```

[^83]:
    ```{=mediawiki}
    {{harvnb|Scovel|2006|p=216}}
    ```

[^84]:
    ```{=mediawiki}
    {{harvnb|"The History of the Prayer Book"}}
    ```

[^85]:
    ```{=mediawiki}
    {{harvnb|Scovel|2006|pp=216–217}}
    ```

[^86]:
    ```{=mediawiki}
    {{harvnb|Spinks|2006|p=519}}
    ```

[^87]:
    ```{=mediawiki}
    {{harvnb|Cuming|1969|pp=192–193}}
    ```

[^88]:
    ```{=mediawiki}
    {{harvnb|Westerfield Tucker|1996|p=244}}
    ```

[^89]:
    ```{=mediawiki}
    {{harvnb|Spinks|2006|p=519}}
    ```

[^90]:
    ```{=mediawiki}
    {{harvnb|Westerfield Tucker|1996|p=230}}
    ```

[^91]:
    ```{=mediawiki}
    {{harvnb|Westerfield Tucker|1996|pp=234, 244}}
    ```

[^92]:
    ```{=mediawiki}
    {{harvnb|Jasper|1989|p=19}}
    ```

[^93]:
    ```{=mediawiki}
    {{harvnb|Westerfield Tucker|1996|p=244}}
    ```

[^94]:
    ```{=mediawiki}
    {{harvnb|Spinks|2006|p=519}}
    ```

[^95]:
    ```{=mediawiki}
    {{harvnb|Marshall|2004|pp=126–129}}
    ```

[^96]:
    ```{=mediawiki}
    {{harvnb|Suter|Cleveland|1949|p=23}}
    ```
    ; `{{harvnb|Marshall|2004|p=142}}`{=mediawiki}

[^97]:
    ```{=mediawiki}
    {{harvnb|Pullan|1901|pp=285–286}}
    ```

[^98]:
    ```{=mediawiki}
    {{harvnb|Calcote|1977|p=289}}
    ```
    ; `{{harvnb|Marshall|2004|p=14}}`{=mediawiki}

[^99]:
    ```{=mediawiki}
    {{harvnb|Calcote|1977|p=289}}
    ```

[^100]:
    ```{=mediawiki}
    {{harvnb|Pullan|1901|pp=285–286}}
    ```

[^101]:
    ```{=mediawiki}
    {{harvnb|Pullan|1901|pp=285, 299}}
    ```

[^102]:
    ```{=mediawiki}
    {{harvnb|Greenwood|1833|p=136}}
    ```

[^103]:
    ```{=mediawiki}
    {{harvnb|Pullan|1901|pp=285–286}}
    ```

[^104]:
    ```{=mediawiki}
    {{harvnb|Marshall|2004|pp=160–161}}
    ```

[^105]:
    ```{=mediawiki}
    {{harvnb|Marshall|2004|pp=144–145}}
    ```

[^106]:
    ```{=mediawiki}
    {{harvnb|Pullan|1901|pp=285–286}}
    ```
    ; `{{harvnb|Suter|Cleveland|1949|p=23}}`{=mediawiki}
